<Moving Averages>
Moving Averages—Simple and Exponential
Discover how simple and exponential moving averages enhance technical analysis. Learn their uses, differences, and applications in trading strategies at StockCharts' ChartSchool.

What Is a Moving Average?
A moving average is an average of data points (usually price) for a specific time period. Why is it called “moving”? That's because each data point is calculated using data from the previous X periods. Because it averages prior data, moving averages smooth the price data to form a trend-following indicator.

A moving average doesn't predict price direction. Instead, it defines the current direction. However, a moving average tends to lag because it's based on past prices. Despite this, investors use moving averages to help smooth price action and filter out the noise.

What is the Best Way to Use Moving Averages?
Moving averages can be used to identify trend direction or define potential support and resistance levels. They also form the building blocks for many other technical indicators and overlays, such as Bollinger Bands, MACD, and the McClellan Oscillator.


The two most popular moving averages are the simple moving average (SMA) and the exponential moving average (EMA). Simple moving averages (SMAs) average prices over the specified timeframe, while exponential moving averages (EMAs) give more weight to recent prices. Other specialty moving averages available in our charting tools include DEMA, Hull Moving Average, KAMA, and TEMA.


What is the Lag Factor in Moving Averages?
Because moving averages are based on past data, they tend to lag behind price data. The longer the moving average, the more the lag. In addition, the type of moving average affects the lag: EMAs with the more recent data weighted more heavily will lag less than an SMA, which gives equal weight to data further in the past.

A 10-day moving average will hug prices quite closely and turn shortly after prices turn. Short-term moving averages are like speedboats—nimble and quick to change. In contrast, a 100-day moving average contains lots of past data that slows it down. Longer-term moving averages are like ocean tankers—lethargic and slow to change. It takes a larger and longer price movement for a 100-day moving average to change course vs. a 10-day moving average.




Keep the lag factor in mind when choosing the right moving average for your chart. Your moving average preferences will depend on your objectives, analytical style, and time horizon. Try experimenting with both types of moving averages, different timeframes, and different securities to find the best fit.

How Do You Calculate Moving Averages?
All moving averages take the average of a specified number of prior data points, but each type of moving average weights those data points differently.

Simple Moving Average Formulas
A simple moving average is formed by computing the average price of a security over a specific number of periods. Most moving averages are based on closing prices; for example, a 5-day simple moving average is the five-day sum of closing prices divided by five. As its name implies, a moving average is an average that moves. Old data is dropped as new data becomes available, causing the average to move along the time scale. The example below shows a 5-day moving average evolving over three days.

Daily Closing Prices: 11,12,13,14,15,16,17

First day of 5-day SMA: (11 + 12 + 13 + 14 + 15) / 5 = 13

Second day of 5-day SMA: (12 + 13 + 14 + 15 + 16) / 5 = 14

Third day of 5-day SMA: (13 + 14 + 15 + 16 + 17) / 5 = 15
The first day of the moving average simply covers the last five days. The second day of the moving average drops the first data point (11) and adds the new data point (16). The third day of the moving average continues by dropping the first data point (12) and adding the new data point (17). In the example above, prices gradually increase from 11 to 17 over a total of seven days. Notice that the moving average also rises from 13 to 15 over a three-day calculation period. Also, notice that each moving average value is just below the last price. For example, the moving average for day one equals 13 and the last price is 15. Prices the prior four days were lower and this causes the moving average to lag.

Exponential Moving Average Formulas
Exponential moving averages (EMAs) reduce the lag by applying more weight to recent prices. The weighting applied to the most recent price depends on the number of periods in the moving average. EMAs differ from simple moving averages in that a given day's EMA calculation depends on the EMA calculations for all the days prior to that day. You need far more than 10 days of data to calculate a reasonably accurate 10-day EMA.

There are three steps to calculating an exponential moving average (EMA). First, calculate the simple moving average for the initial EMA value. An exponential moving average (EMA) has to start somewhere, so a simple moving average is used as the previous period's EMA in the first calculation. Second, calculate the weighting multiplier. Third, calculate the exponential moving average for each day between the initial EMA value and today, using the price, the multiplier, and the previous period's EMA value. The formula below is for a 10-day EMA.


Initial SMA: 10-period sum / 10 

Multiplier: (2 / (Time periods + 1) ) = (2 / (10 + 1) ) = 0.1818 (18.18%)

EMA: {Close - EMA(previous day)} x multiplier + EMA(previous day). 
What is the Weighting Multiplier in a Moving Average?
A 10-period exponential moving average applies an 18.18% weighting to the most recent price. A 10-period EMA can also be called an 18.18% EMA. A 20-period EMA applies a 9.52% weighting to the most recent price (2/(20+1) = .0952). Notice that the weighting for the shorter time period is more than the weighting for the longer time period. In fact, the weighting drops by half every time the moving average period doubles.

If you want to use a specific percentage for an EMA, you can use this formula to convert it to time periods and then enter that value as the EMA's parameter:

Time Period = (2 / Percentage) - 1

3% Example:  Time Period = (2 / 0.03) - 1 = 65.67 time periods
How Accurate is the EMA?
Below is a spreadsheet example of a 10-day simple moving average and a 10-day exponential moving average for Intel. The SMA calculation is straightforward and requires little explanation: the 10-day SMA simply moves as new prices become available and old prices drop off. The exponential moving average in the spreadsheet starts with the SMA value (22.22) for its first EMA value. After the first calculation, the normal EMA formula is used.

The formula for an EMA incorporates the previous period's EMA value, which in turn incorporates the value for the EMA value before that, and so on. Each previous EMA value accounts for a small portion of the current value. Therefore, the current EMA value will change depending on how much past data you use in your EMA calculation. Ideally, for a 100% accurate EMA, you should use every data point the stock has ever had in calculating the EMA, starting your calculations from the first day the stock existed. This is not always practical, but the more data points you use, the more accurate your EMA will be. The goal is to maximize accuracy while minimizing calculation time.

Adjusting the Settings
Simple vs Exponential Moving Averages
When adding a moving average to your chart, deciding whether to use an exponential or a simple moving average is the first choice. Although clear differences exist between simple and exponential moving averages, one is not necessarily better. Choosing the right type of moving average depends on your trading objectives.

Exponential moving averages have less lag and are, therefore, more sensitive to recent prices and recent price changes. Exponential moving averages will turn before simple moving averages.

On the other hand, simple moving averages represent a true average of prices for the entire period. As such, simple moving averages may be better suited to identify support or resistance levels.

Lengths and Timeframes
The length of the moving average depends on the trader's time horizon and analytical objectives. Short moving averages (5-20 periods) are best suited for short-term trends and trading. Chartists interested in medium-term trends would opt for longer moving averages that might extend 20-60 periods. Long-term investors will prefer moving averages with 100 or more periods.

Some moving average lengths are more popular than others. The 200-day moving average is perhaps the most popular. Because of its length, this is clearly a long-term moving average. Next, the 50-day moving average is quite popular for the medium-term trend. Many chartists use the 50-day and 200-day moving averages together. Short-term, a 10-day moving average was quite popular in the past because it was easy to calculate. One simply added the numbers and moved the decimal point.

Base Data
Moving averages are typically based on price data, specifically closing price data. However, moving averages can be applied to other types of price data (open, high, or low), volume data, or even other indicators. 

The example below shows a chart with a 50-day SMA applied to the volume bars and a 20-day EMA applied to the RSI indicator.

Interpreting Moving Averages
Moving averages can be used to identify the trend, as well as support and resistance levels. Crossovers with price or with another moving average can provide trading signals. Chartists may also create a Moving Average Ribbon with more than one moving average to analyze the interaction between multiple MAs at once.

How Do You Identify a Trend Using Moving Averages?
The direction of the moving average conveys important information about prices, whether that average is simple or exponential. A rising moving average shows that prices are generally increasing. A falling moving average indicates that prices, on average, are falling. A rising long-term moving average reflects a long-term uptrend. A falling long-term moving average reflects a long-term downtrend.

The example chart shows that moving averages are effective during strong trends.
The 150-day EMA turned lower in November 2007 and again in January 2008. Notice that it took a 15% decline to reverse the direction of this moving average. These lagging indicators identify trend reversals as they occur (at best) or after they occur (at worst). MMM continued lower into March 2009 and then surged 40-50%. Notice that the 150-day EMA did not turn up until after this surge. Once it did, however, MMM continued higher the next 12 months. Moving averages work brilliantly in strong trends.

How Do You Read a Double Moving Average Crossover?
Two moving averages can be used together to generate crossover signals. In Technical Analysis of the Financial Markets, John Murphy calls this the “double crossover method”. Double crossovers involve one relatively short moving average and one relatively long moving average. As with all moving averages, the general length of the moving average defines the timeframe for the system. A system using a 5-day EMA and a 35-day EMA would be deemed short-term. A system using a 50-day SMA and 200-day SMA would be deemed medium-term, perhaps even long-term.

A bullish crossover occurs when the shorter moving average crosses above the longer moving average. This is also known as a golden cross. A bearish crossover occurs when the shorter moving average crosses below the longer moving average. This is known as a death cross (sometimes called a “dead cross”).

Moving average crossovers produce relatively late signals. After all, the system employs two lagging indicators. The longer the moving average periods, the greater the lag in the signals. These signals work great when a good trend takes hold. However, when there's no strong trend, a moving average crossover system will produce many whipsaws.

There is also a triple crossover method that involves three moving averages. Again, a signal is generated when the shortest moving average crosses the two longer moving averages. A simple triple crossover system might involve 5-day, 10-day, and 20-day moving averages.

Example of moving average crossovers.
A moving average crossover would have resulted in three whipsaws before catching a good trade. The 10-day EMA broke below the 50-day EMA in late October (1), but this did not last long as the 10-day moved back above in mid-November (2). This cross lasted longer, but the next bearish crossover in January (3) occurred near late November price levels, resulting in another whipsaw. This bearish cross did not last long, as the 10-day EMA moved back above the 50-day a few days later (4). After three bad signals, the fourth signal foreshadowed a strong move as the stock advanced over 20%.

The takeaways:

Crossovers are prone to whipsaw. You can prevent whipsaws by applying a price or time filter. Traders might require the crossover to last three days before acting or the 10-day EMA to move above/below the 50-day EMA by a certain amount before acting.

MACD can be used to identify and quantify these crossovers. MACD (10,50,1) will show a line representing the difference between the two exponential moving averages. MACD turns positive during a golden cross and negative during a death cross. The Percentage Price Oscillator (PPO) can be used similarly to show percentage differences. Note that MACD and the PPO are based on exponential moving averages and will not match up with simple moving averages.

Adding the MACD indicator to a chart can help to quantify EMA crossovers.
There were four moving average crossovers over a two-and-a-half-year period. The first three resulted in whipsaws or bad trades. A sustained trend began with the fourth crossover as ORCL advanced to the mid-20s. Once again, moving average crossovers work great when the trend is strong but when there's no strong trend, they can result in whipsaws.

How Do You Interpret Price Crossing a Moving Average?
Moving averages can also be used to generate signals with simple price crossovers. A bullish signal is generated when prices move above the moving average. A bearish signal is generated when prices move below the moving average. Price crossovers can be combined to trade within the bigger trend. The longer moving average sets the tone for the bigger trend, and the shorter moving average generates the signals. You would look for bullish price crosses only when prices are already above the longer moving average. This would be trading in harmony with the bigger trend. For example, if price is above the 200-day moving average, chartists would only focus on signals when price moves above the 50-day moving average. A move below the 50-day moving average would precede such a signal, but such bearish crosses would be ignored because the bigger trend is up. A bearish cross would simply suggest a pullback within a bigger uptrend. A cross back above the 50-day moving average would signal an upturn in prices and a continuation of the bigger uptrend.

The next chart shows Emerson Electric (EMR) with the 50-day EMA and 200-day EMA. The stock crossed and held above the 200-day moving average in August. There were dips below the 50-day EMA in early November and again in early February. Prices quickly moved back above the 50-day EMA to provide bullish signals (green arrows) in harmony with the bigger uptrend. MACD(1,50,1) is shown in the indicator window to confirm price crosses above or below the 50-day EMA. The 1-day EMA equals the closing price. MACD(1,50,1) is positive when the close is above the 50-day EMA and negative when the close is below the 50-day EMA.


Learn More About Moving Average Crossovers. How To Trade Price-to-Moving Average Crossovers

Can Moving Averages Be Used To Identify Support and Resistance?
Moving averages can also act as support in an uptrend and resistance in a downtrend. A short-term uptrend might find support near the 20-day simple moving average, also used in Bollinger Bands. A long-term uptrend might find support near the 200-day simple moving average, the most popular long-term moving average. The 200-day moving average may offer support or resistance because it's widely used. It is almost like a self-fulfilling prophecy.

The chart below shows the NY Composite with the 200-day simple moving average from mid-2004 until the end of 2008. The 200-day provided support numerous times during the advance. Once the trend reversed with a double top support break, the 200-day moving average acted as resistance around 9500.


Do not expect exact support and resistance levels from moving averages, especially longer moving averages. Markets are driven by emotion, which makes them prone to overshoots. Instead of exact levels, moving averages can be used to identify support or resistance zones.

Learn More. Support and Resistance: How to trade using moving averages as support and resistance levels

The Bottom Line
The advantages of using moving averages need to be weighed against the disadvantages. Moving averages are trend-following, or lagging, indicators that will always be a step behind. This isn't necessarily a bad thing, though. After all, the trend is your friend, and it's best to trade in the direction of the trend. Moving averages ensure that a trader is in line with the current trend. Even though the trend is your friend, securities spend much time in trading ranges, which renders moving averages ineffective. Once in a trend, moving averages will keep you in but also give late signals. Don't expect to sell at the top and buy at the bottom using moving averages.

As with most technical analysis tools, moving averages should not be used alone, but in conjunction with other complementary tools. For example, chartists can use moving averages to define the overall trend and then use RSI to define overbought or oversold levels.

A moving average helps to smooth price action and filter out noise in the data. It is used to identify trend direction, define potential support and resistance levels, and serves as a building block for many other technical indicators.

How does the lag factor affect moving averages? Moving averages tend to lag behind price data because they are based on past prices. The longer the moving average, the more it lags. EMAs, which are more weighted toward recent data, lag less than SMAs, which give equal weight to past data.
Shorter moving averages (5-20 periods) are suitable for short-term trends and trading. Medium-term trends can be analyzed using longer moving averages (20-60 periods). Long-term investors often use moving averages with 100 or more periods.

Moving averages can be used to generate trading signals. One of the most basic techniques is that of using crossovers. A bullish crossover occurs when a shorter moving average crosses above a longer moving average, indicating a potential buying opportunity. A bearish crossover occurs when a shorter moving average crosses below a longer moving average, indicating a potential selling opportunity. Note that there are several other ways to use moving averages to generate trading signals.

</Moving Averages>

<MACD>
MACD (Moving Average Convergence/Divergence) Oscillator
Learn how the MACD (Moving Average Convergence/Divergence) oscillator enhances technical analysis by measuring momentum and trend direction. Discover its application for informed trading decisions.

What Is the Moving Average Convergence/Divergence Oscillator?
Developed by Gerald Appel in the late seventies, the Moving Average Convergence/Divergence oscillator (MACD), due to its simplicity and general effectiveness, is one of the most popular momentum indicators. The MACD turns two trend-following indicators, moving averages, into a momentum oscillator by subtracting the longer moving average from the shorter one. As a result, the MACD offers the best of both worlds: trend following and momentum. The MACD fluctuates above and below the zero line as the moving averages converge, cross and diverge. Traders can look for signal line crossovers, centerline crossovers and divergences to generate signals. Because the MACD is unbounded, it is not particularly useful for identifying overbought and oversold levels.
How Do You Calculate the MACD?
Copy
MACD Line: (12-day EMA - 26-day EMA)

Signal Line: 9-day EMA of MACD Line

MACD Histogram: MACD Line - Signal Line
The MACD line is the 12-day Exponential Moving Average (EMA) less the 26-day EMA. Closing prices are used for these moving averages. A nine-day EMA of the MACD line is plotted with the indicator, which acts as a signal line and identifies reversals. The MACD Histogram represents the difference between MACD and its nine-day EMA, the signal line. The histogram is positive when the MACD line is above its signal line and negative when the MACD line is below its signal line.

The values of 12, 26, and 9 are the typical settings used with the MACD, though other values can be substituted depending on your trading style and goals.
How Do You Interpret the MACD?
Convergence/Divergence
As its name implies, the MACD is all about the convergence and divergence of the two moving averages. Convergence occurs when the moving averages move towards each other. Divergence occurs when the moving averages move away from each other. The shorter moving average (12-day) is faster and responsible for most MACD movements. The longer moving average (26-day) is slower and less reactive to price changes in the underlying security.

Oscillator
The MACD line oscillates above and below the zero line, also known as the centerline. These crossovers signal that the 12-day EMA has crossed the 26-day EMA. The direction, of course, depends on the direction of the moving average cross. Positive MACD indicates that the 12-day EMA is above the 26-day EMA. Positive values increase as the shorter EMA diverges further from the longer EMA. This means upside momentum is increasing. Negative MACD values indicate the 12-day EMA is below the 26-day EMA. Negative values increase as the shorter EMA diverges further below the longer EMA. This means downside momentum is increasing.
In the example above, the golden shaded area shows the MACD line in negative territory as the 12-day EMA trades below the 26-day EMA. In mid-February, the MACD moved further into negative territory as the 12-day EMA diverged further from the 26-day EMA. The red area highlights a period of positive MACD values, when the 12-day EMA was above the 26-day EMA.

Signal Line Crossovers
Signal line crossovers are the most common MACD signals. The signal line is a 9-day EMA of the MACD line. As a moving average of the indicator, it trails the MACD and makes it easier to spot MACD turns. A bullish crossover occurs when the MACD turns up and crosses above the signal line. A bearish crossover occurs when the MACD turns down and crosses below the signal line. Crossovers can last a few days or a few weeks, depending on the strength of the move.

Due diligence is required before relying on these common signals. Signal line crossovers at positive or negative extremes should be viewed with caution. Even though the MACD does not have upper and lower limits, chartists can estimate historical extremes with a simple visual assessment. It takes a strong move in the underlying security to push momentum to an extreme. Even though the move may continue, momentum is likely to slow and this will usually produce a signal line crossover at the extremities. Volatility in the underlying security can also increase the number of crossovers.

The chart below shows IBM with its 12-day EMA (green), 26-day EMA (red) and the 12,26,9 MACD in the indicator window. There were eight signal line crossovers in six months: four up and four down. There were some good signals and some bad signals. The yellow area highlights a period when the MACD line surged above 2 to reach a positive extreme. There were two bearish signal line crossovers in April and May, but IBM continued trending higher. Even though upward momentum slowed after the surge, it was still stronger than downside momentum in April-May. The third bearish signal line crossover in May resulted in a good signal.
Centerline Crossovers
Centerline crossovers are the next most common MACD signals. A bullish centerline crossover occurs when the MACD line moves above the zero line to turn positive. This happens when the 12-day EMA of the underlying security moves above the 26-day EMA. A bearish centerline crossover occurs when the MACD moves below the zero line to turn negative. This happens when the 12-day EMA moves below the 26-day EMA.

Centerline crossovers can last a few days or a few months, depending on the strength of the trend. The MACD will remain positive as long as there is a sustained uptrend. The MACD will remain negative when there is a sustained downtrend. The next chart shows Pulte Homes (PHM) with at least four centerline crosses in nine months. The resulting signals worked well because strong trends emerged with these centerline crossovers.
Divergences
Divergences form when the MACD diverges from the price action of the underlying security. A bullish divergence forms when a security records a lower low and the MACD forms a higher low. The lower low in the security affirms the current downtrend, but the higher low in the MACD shows less downside momentum. Despite decreasing, downside momentum is still outpacing upside momentum as long as the MACD remains in negative territory. Slowing downside momentum can sometimes foreshadow a trend reversal or a sizable rally.

The next chart shows Google (GOOG) with a bullish divergence in October-November 2008. First, notice that we are using closing prices to identify the divergence. The MACD's moving averages are based on closing prices and we should consider closing prices in the security as well. Second, notice that there were clear reaction lows (troughs) as both Google and its MACD line bounced in October and late November. Third, notice that the MACD formed a higher low as Google formed a lower low in November. The MACD turned up with a bullish divergence and a signal line crossover in early December. Google confirmed a reversal with a resistance breakout.
A bearish divergence forms when a security records a higher high and the MACD line forms a lower high. The higher high in the security is normal for an uptrend, but the lower high in the MACD shows less upside momentum. Even though upside momentum may be less, upside momentum is still outpacing downside momentum as long as the MACD is positive. Waning upward momentum can sometimes foreshadow a trend reversal or sizable decline.

Below we see Gamestop (GME) with a large bearish divergence from August to October. The stock forged a higher high above 28, but the MACD line fell short of its prior high and formed a lower high. The subsequent signal line crossover and support break in the MACD were bearish. On the price chart, notice how broken support turned into resistance on the throwback bounce in November (red dotted line). This throwback provided a second chance to sell or sell short.
Divergences should be taken with caution. Bearish divergences are commonplace in a strong uptrend, while bullish divergences occur often in a strong downtrend. Yes, you read that right. Uptrends often start with a strong advance that produces a surge in upside momentum (MACD). Even though the uptrend continues, it continues at a slower pace that causes the MACD to decline from its highs. Upside momentum may not be as strong, but it will continue to outpace downside momentum as long as the MACD line is above zero. The opposite occurs at the beginning of a strong downtrend.

The next chart shows the S&P 500 ETF (SPY) with four bearish divergences from August to November 2009. Despite less upside momentum, the ETF continued higher because the uptrend was strong. Notice how SPY continued its series of higher highs and higher lows. Remember, upside momentum is stronger than downside momentum as long as the MACD is positive. The MACD (momentum) may have been less positive (strong) as the advance extended, but it was still largely positive.
The Bottom Line
The MACD indicator is special because it brings together momentum and trend in one indicator. This unique blend of trend and momentum can be applied to daily, weekly or monthly charts. The standard setting for MACD is the difference between the 12- and 26-period EMAs. Chartists looking for more sensitivity may try a shorter short-term moving average and a longer long-term moving average. MACD(5,35,5) is more sensitive than MACD(12,26,9) and might be better suited for weekly charts. Chartists looking for less sensitivity may consider lengthening the moving averages. A less sensitive MACD will still oscillate above/below zero, but the centerline crossovers and signal line crossovers will be less frequent.

The MACD is not particularly good for identifying overbought and oversold levels. Even though it is possible to identify levels that are historically overbought or oversold, the MACD does not have any upper or lower limits to bind its movement. During sharp moves, the MACD can continue to over-extend beyond its historical extremes.

Finally, remember that the MACD line is calculated using the actual difference between two moving averages. This means MACD values are dependent on the price of the underlying security. The MACD values for a $20 stocks may range from -1.5 to 1.5, while the MACD values for a $100 may range from -10 to +10. It is not possible to compare MACD values for a group of securities with varying prices. If you want to compare momentum readings, you should use the Percentage Price Oscillator (PPO), instead of the MACD.

</MACD>

<RSI>
Relative Strength Index (RSI)
Explore the Relative Strength Index (RSI) and its pivotal role in technical analysis. Learn how RSI measures price momentum and identifies overbought or oversold conditions.

What Is the Relative Strength Index (RSI)?
The RSI, a momentum oscillator developed by J. Welles Wilder, measures the speed and change of price movements. The RSI moves up and down (oscillates) between zero and 100. When the RSI is above 70, it generally indicates overbought conditions; when the RSI is below 30, it indicates oversold conditions. The RSI also generates trading signals via divergences, failure swings, and centerline crossovers. You could also use the RSI to identify the general trend.

RSI is a popular momentum indicator that has been featured in a number of articles, interviews, and books over the years. In particular, Constance Brown's book, Technical Analysis for the Trading Professional, features the concept of bull and bear market ranges for RSI. Andrew Cardwell, Brown's RSI mentor, introduced positive and negative reversals for RSI and turned the notion of divergence, literally and figuratively, on its head.

Wilder features RSI in his 1978 book, New Concepts in Technical Trading Systems. This book also includes the Parabolic SAR, Average True Range, and the Directional Movement Concept (ADX). Despite being developed before the computer age, Wilder's indicators have stood the test of time and continue to be applied by chart analysts.
Calculating the RSI
Copy
                  100
    RSI = 100 - --------
                 1 + RS

    RS = Average Gain / Average Loss
There are three basic components in the RSI—RS, Average Gain, and Average Loss. This RSI calculation is based on 14 periods, the default Wilder suggested in his book. Losses are expressed as positive values, not negative values.

The first calculations for average gain and average loss are simple 14-period averages:

First Average Gain = Sum of Gains over the past 14 periods / 14.

First Average Loss = Sum of Losses over the past 14 periods / 14.

The second and subsequent, calculations are based on the prior averages and the current gain loss:

Average Gain = [(previous Average Gain) x 13 + current Gain] / 14.

Average Loss = [(previous Average Loss) x 13 + current Loss] / 14.

Taking the prior value plus the current value is a smoothing technique similar to calculating an exponential moving average. This also means RSI values become more accurate as the calculation period extends. SharpCharts uses at least 250 data points before the starting date of any chart (assuming that much data exists) when calculating its RSI values. A formula will need at least 250 data points to replicate our RSI numbers.

Wilder's formula normalizes RS and turns it into an oscillator that fluctuates between zero and 100. The normalization step makes it easier to identify extremes because RSI is range-bound. When the Average Gain equals zero, RSI is zero. So, if you're using a 14-period RSI, a zero RSI value means prices moved lower in all 14 periods. There were no gains to measure. RSI is 100 when the Average Loss equals zero. This means prices moved higher in all 14 periods, and there were no losses to measure.
What Are the Best RSI Parameters?
The default look-back period for RSI is 14, but you can lower it to increase sensitivity or raise it to decrease sensitivity. A 10-day RSI is more likely to reach overbought or oversold levels than a 20-day RSI. The look-back parameters also depend on a security's volatility. The 14-day RSI for a volatile stock such as Amazon (AMZN) is more likely to become overbought or oversold than a 14-day RSI for a utility company such as Duke Energy (DUK).

The traditional overbought and oversold levels can be adjusted to better fit the security or analytical requirements. Raising the overbought threshold to 80 or lowering the oversold threshold to 20 could reduce the number of overbought/oversold readings. Short-term traders sometimes use 2-period RSI to look for overbought readings above 80 and oversold readings below 20.

Overbought and Oversold RSI Levels
Wilder considered RSI overbought above 70 and oversold below 30. Chart 3 shows McDonalds with 14-day RSI. This chart features daily bars in gray with a one-day SMA in pink to highlight closing prices (as RSI is based on closing prices). Working from left to right, the stock became oversold in late July and found support around 44 (1).

Notice that the bottom evolved after the oversold reading. Bottoming can be a process—this stock did not bottom as soon as the oversold reading appeared. From oversold levels, RSI moved above 70 in mid-September to become overbought. Despite this overbought reading, the stock did not decline; instead, it stalled for a couple weeks and then continued higher.

Three more overbought readings occurred before the stock finally peaked in December (2). Momentum oscillators can become overbought (oversold) and remain so in a strong up (down) trend. The first three overbought readings foreshadowed consolidations. The fourth coincided with a significant peak. RSI then moved from overbought to oversold in January. The stock ultimately bottomed around 46 a few weeks later (3); the final bottom did not coincide with the initial oversold reading.
Like many momentum oscillators, overbought and oversold readings for RSI work best when prices move sideways within a range. Chart 4 shows MEMC Electronics (WFR) trading between 13.5 and 21 from April to September 2009. The stock peaked soon after RSI reached 70 and bottomed soon after the stock reached 30.
Bullish and Bearish Divergences in RSI
According to Wilder, divergences signal a potential reversal point because directional momentum does not confirm price. A bullish divergence occurs when the underlying security makes a lower low, and RSI forms a higher low. RSI does not confirm the lower low, and this shows strengthening momentum. A bearish divergence forms when the security records a higher high and RSI forms a lower high. RSI does not confirm the new high and this shows weakening momentum. 

Chart 5 shows Ebay (EBAY) with a bearish divergence in August–October. The stock moved to new highs in September–October, but RSI formed lower highs for the bearish divergence. The subsequent breakdown in mid-October confirmed weakening momentum.
A bullish divergence formed in January–March. The bullish divergence formed with eBay moving to new lows in March and RSI holding above its prior low. RSI reflected less downside momentum during the February-March decline. The mid-March breakout confirmed improving momentum. Divergences tend to be more robust when they form after an overbought or oversold reading.

Before getting too excited about divergences as great trading signals, it must be noted that divergences are misleading in a strong trend. A strong uptrend can show numerous bearish divergences before a top materializes. 

Conversely, bullish divergences can appear in a strong downtrend, yet the downtrend continues. Chart 6 shows the SPDR S&P 500 ETF (SPY) with three bearish divergences and a continuing uptrend. These bearish divergences may have warned of a short-term pullback, but there was clearly no major trend reversal.
RSI Failure Swings
Wilder also considered failure swings as strong indications of an impending reversal. Failure swings are independent of price action, focusing solely on RSI for signals and ignoring the concept of divergences. A bullish failure swing forms when RSI moves below 30 (oversold), bounces above 30, pulls back, holds above 30 and then breaks its prior high. It is basically a move to oversold levels and then a higher low above oversold levels. Chart 7 shows Research in Motion (RIMM) with 10-day RSI forming a bullish failure swing.
How To Use RSI To Identify Trends
In Technical Analysis for the Trading Professional, Constance Brown suggests that oscillators do not travel between 0 and 100. This also happens to be the name of the first chapter. Brown identifies a bull market range and a bear market for RSI. RSI tends to fluctuate between 40 and 90 in a bull market (uptrend) with the 40–50 zones acting as support. These ranges may vary depending on RSI parameters, strength of trend and volatility of the underlying security. Chart 9 shows 14-week RSI for SPY during the bull market from 2003 until 2007. RSI surged above 70 in late 2003 and then moved into its bull market range (40–90). There was one overshoot below 40 in July 2004, but RSI held the 40–50 zone at least five times from January 2005 until October 2007 (green arrows). In fact, notice that pullbacks to this zone provided low risk entry points to participate in the uptrend.
On the flip side, RSI tends to fluctuate between 10 and 60 in a bear market (downtrend) with the 50-60 zone acting as resistance. Chart 10 shows 14-day RSI for the US Dollar Index ($USD) during its 2009 downtrend. RSI moved to 30 in March to signal the start of a bear range. The 50–60 zone subsequently marked resistance until a breakout in December.
Identifying Positive and Negative Reversals With RSI
Andrew Cardwell developed positive and negative reversals for RSI, which are the opposite of bearish and bullish divergences. Cardwell's books are out of print, but he offers seminars detailing these methods. Cardwell's interpretation of divergences differs from Wilder's. Cardwell considered bearish divergences to be bull market phenomena. In other words, bearish divergences are more likely to form in uptrends. Similarly, bullish divergences are considered bear market phenomena and are indicative of a downtrend.

A positive reversal forms when RSI forges a lower low, and the security forms a higher low. This lower low is not at oversold levels but is usually between 30 and 50. Chart 11 shows MMM with a positive reversal forming in June 2009. MMM broke resistance a few weeks later, and RSI moved above 70. Despite weaker momentum with a lower low in RSI, MMM held above its prior low and showed underlying strength. In essence, price action overruled momentum.
A negative reversal is the opposite of a positive reversal. RSI forms a higher high, but the security forms a lower high. Again, the higher high is usually just below overbought levels in the 50-70 area. Chart 12 shows Starbucks (SBUX) forming a lower high as RSI forms a higher high. Even though RSI forged a new high and momentum was strong, the price action failed to confirm as lower high formed. This negative reversal foreshadowed the big support break in late June and sharp decline.
The Bottom Line
RSI is a versatile momentum oscillator that has stood the test of time. Despite changes in volatility and the markets, RSI remains as relevant now as it was in Wilder's days. While Wilder's original interpretations help understand the indicator, the work of Brown and Cardwell takes RSI interpretation to a new level. But adjusting to this level takes some rethinking.

Wilder considers overbought conditions ripe for a reversal, but overbought can also be a sign of strength. Bearish divergences still produce some good sell signals, but you must be careful in strong trends when bearish divergences are normal. Even though the concept of positive and negative reversals may seem to undermine Wilder's interpretation, the logic makes sense. Wilder would hardly dismiss the value of putting more emphasis on price action. Positive and negative reversals put price action of the underlying security first and the indicator second, which is how it should be. Bearish and bullish divergences place the indicator first and price action second. By emphasizing price action, the concept of positive and negative reversals challenges our thinking toward momentum oscillators.
</RSI>

<Support and Resistance>
Support & Resistance
Explore the fundamentals of support and resistance levels in stock chart analysis. StockCharts ChartSchool offers you the resources to empower you with the knowledge to navigate the stock market.

Support and Resistance—In Simple Words
Support and resistance levels represent key junctures where supply and demand meet. In the financial markets, prices are driven by excesses of supply (down) and demand (up). Supply is synonymous with bearish, bears, and selling. Demand is synonymous with bullish, bulls, and buying. These terms are used interchangeably throughout this and other articles. As demand increases, prices advance, and as supply increases, prices decline. When supply and demand are equal, prices move sideways as bulls and bears slug it out to gain control.

What Is Support?
Support is the price level at which demand is thought to be strong enough to prevent the price from declining further. The logic dictates that as the price declines towards support and gets cheaper, buyers become more inclined to buy and sellers become less inclined to sell. By the time the price reaches the support level, it is believed that demand will overcome supply and prevent the price from falling below support.
Support does not always hold, however, and a break below support signals that the bears have won out over the bulls. A decline below support indicates a new willingness to sell and/or a lack of incentive to buy. Support breaks and new lows signal that sellers have reduced their expectations and are willing sell at even lower prices. In addition, buyers could not be coerced into buying until prices declined below support or below the previous low. Once support is broken, another support level will have to be established at a lower level.

Where Is Support Established?
Support levels are usually below the current price, but it is not uncommon for a security to trade at or near support. As technical analysis is not an exact science, setting precise support levels can often be difficult. In addition, price movements can be volatile and briefly dip below support. For example, it does not seem logical to consider a support level broken if the price closes an eighth below the established support level. For this reason, some traders and investors establish support zones.
What Is Resistance?
Resistance is the price level at which selling is thought to be strong enough to prevent the price from rising further. Logic dictates that, as the price advances towards resistance, sellers become more inclined to sell and buyers become less inclined to buy. By the time the price reaches the resistance level, it is believed that supply will overcome demand and prevent the price from rising above resistance.
Resistance does not always hold; a break above resistance signals that the bulls have won out over the bears. A break above resistance shows a new willingness to buy and/or a lack of incentive to sell. Resistance breaks and new highs indicate buyers have increased their expectations and are willing to buy at even higher prices. In addition, sellers could not be coerced into selling until prices rose above resistance or above the previous high. Once resistance is broken, another resistance level will have to be established at a higher level.

Where Is Resistance Established?
Resistance levels are usually above the current price, but it is not uncommon for a security to trade at or near resistance. In addition, price movements can be volatile and rise above resistance briefly. Sometimes it does not seem logical to consider a resistance level broken if the price closes 1/8 above the established resistance level. For this reason, some traders and investors establish resistance zones.

Methods to Establish Support and Resistance?
Support and resistance share enough common characteristics to be mirror images of each other.
Highs and Lows
Support can be established with the previous reaction lows, while resistance can be established by using the previous reaction highs.

The below chart of Halliburton (HAL) shows a large trading range between Dec-99 and Mar-00. Support was established with the October low around 31. In December, the stock returned to support in the mid-thirties and formed a low of around 33. Finally, in February, the stock again returned to the support scene and formed a low of around 32 1/2.
After each bounce off a support level, the stock traded up to resistance. Resistance was first established by the September support break at 42.5. After a support level is broken, it can turn into a resistance level. The stock advanced to the new support-turned-resistance level of around 42.5 from the October lows. The resistance level was confirmed when the stock failed to advance past 42.5. The stock traded up to 42.5 twice after that and failed to surpass resistance.
Support Equals Resistance
Another principle of technical analysis stipulates that support can turn into resistance and vice versa. Once the price breaks below a support level, the broken support level can turn into resistance. The break of support signals that the forces of supply have overcome the forces of demand. Therefore, if the price returns to this level, there is likely to be an increase in supply, hence resistance.

The other turn of the coin is resistance turning into support. As the price advances above resistance, it signals changes in supply and demand. The breakout above resistance proves that the forces of demand have overwhelmed the forces of supply; if the price returns to this level, demand will likely increase, and support will be found.

The NASDAQ 100 Index ($NDX) broke resistance at 935 in May-97 and traded just above this resistance level for over a month (see chart below). As the index remained above resistance, 935 was established as a new support level. The stock rose to 1150 but fell back to test support at 935. After the second test of support at 935, this level is well established.
In the chart below, you see that support can turn into resistance and then back into support. PeopleSoft found support at 18 from Oct-98 to Jan-99 (green oval) but broke below support in Mar-99 as the bears overpowered the bulls. When the stock rebounded (red oval), there was still overhead supply at 18, and resistance was met from Jun-99 to Oct-99.
Where does this overhead supply come from? Demand was obviously increasing around 18 from Oct-98 to Mar-99 (green oval). Therefore, there were a lot of bullish buyers of the stock around 18. When the price declined below 18 and fell to around 14, many of these (now unhappy) bulls were probably still holding the stock. This left a supply overhang (commonly known as resistance) around 18. When the stock rebounded to 18, many green-oval-bulls probably took the opportunity to sell and “escape” with little to no loss. When this supply was exhausted, the demand could overpower supply and advance above resistance at 18.

Trading Range
Trading ranges can be important in determining whether support and resistance function as turning points or continuation patterns. A trading range is when prices move within a relatively tight range. This signals that the forces of supply and demand are evenly balanced. When the price breaks out of the trading range, above or below, it signals that a winner has emerged. A break above is a victory for the bulls (demand), and a break below is a victory for the bears (supply).

After an extended advance from 27 to 64, WorldCom (WCOM) entered a trading range between 55 and 63 for about five months. There was a false breakout in mid-June when the stock briefly poked its head above 62 (red oval). This did not last long, and a gap down a few days later nullified the breakout (black arrow). The stock then proceeded to break support at 55 in Aug-99 and trade as low as 50. 
The stock bounced off 55 two more times before heading lower (support turning to resistance). While this doesn't always happen, a return to the new resistance level offers a second chance for longs to get out and shorts to enter the fray.

In Nov/Dec-99, Lucent Technologies (LU) formed a trading range that resembled a head and shoulders pattern (red oval). When the stock broke support at 60, there was little or no time to exit. Even though a long black candlestick indicates an open at 59, the stock fell so fast that it was impossible to exit above 44. In hindsight, the support line could have been drawn as an upward-sloping neckline (blue line), and the support break would have come at 61. This is only one point higher; a trader must take action immediately to avoid a sharp fall. However, the lows match up nicely with the neckline, which is something to consider when drawing support lines.
After Lucent declined, a trading range was established between 40.5 and 47.5 for almost two months (green oval). The resistance level of the trading range was well-marked by three reaction peaks at 47.5. The support level was not as clearly marked but is between 40 and 41. Some buying interest began to become evident around 44 in mid-to-late February. Notice the many candlesticks with long lower shadows, or hammers, as they are known. The stock then formed two up gaps on 24-Feb and 25-Feb and finally closed above resistance at 48. This was a clear indication of demand winning out over supply. There were still two more opportunities (days) to get in on the action. On the third day after the breakout, the stock gapped up and moved above 56.

What Are Support and Resistance Zones?
Because technical analysis is not an exact science, creating support and resistance zones is useful. This contradicts the strategy mapped out for Lucent Technologies (LU), but it is sometimes the case. 

Each security has its characteristics, and analysis should reflect the intricacies of the security. Sometimes, exact support and resistance levels are best, and sometimes, zones work better. Generally, the tighter the range, the more exact the level. If the trading range spans less than two months and the price range is relatively tight, then more exact support and resistance levels are best suited. If a trading range spans many months and the price range is relatively large, it's best to use support and resistance zones. These are only general guidelines, and each trading range should be judged on its own merits.

Returning to the Halliburton (HAL) analysis, you can see that the November high of the trading range (32 to 44) extended more than 20% past the October low, making the range quite large relative to the price. Because the September support break forms the first resistance level, you're ready to set up a resistance zone after the November high is formed, probably around early December. However, it's difficult to tell if a large trading range will develop. 
The subsequent low in December, which was just higher than the October low, offers evidence that a trading range is forming, and we are ready to set the support zone. As long as the stock trades within the boundaries set by the support and resistance zone, we will consider the trading range to be valid. Support may be looked upon as an opportunity to buy, and resistance as an opportunity to sell.

The Bottom Line
Identification of key support and resistance levels is an essential ingredient to successful technical analysis. Even though it's sometimes difficult to establish exact support and resistance levels, knowing their existence and location can greatly enhance analysis and forecasting abilities. If a security is approaching an important support level, it can serve as an alert to be extra vigilant in looking for signs of increased buying pressure and a potential reversal. If a security approaches a resistance level, it can act as an alert to signs of increased selling pressure and potential reversal. If a support or resistance level is broken, the relationship between supply and demand has changed. A resistance breakout signals that the bulls (demand) have gained the upper hand, and a support break signals that the bears (supply) have won the battle.
</Support and Resistance>
